I am a professor of the Russian Economic Academy named after Georgy Valentinovich Plokhanov,
where I teach MBA courses on management of personnel and management of organizations.
I am also a consultant in the field of management of human resources.
I have been working in the field of human resources for more than 20 years.
The topic of our meeting today is the analysis of labor motivation,
the models of motivation, the methods of change, modification, improvement of motivation.
And, of course, when we talk about motivation, we will focus on the main problems that arise in this system.
If we talk about the problems of motivation, then this problem can be said to be old as a brick.
What is motivation? If we do not go into various academic theories,
which, in principle, do not interest us, because the task that lies ahead of us is to master those practical skills
that will be interesting to us from the point of view of our functioning in business,
from the point of view of solving those business tasks that lie ahead of us.
Therefore, from the point of view of pragmatic assessment, pragmatic evaluation,
motivation is the reason for determining human behavior.
Why does a person make an effort to work?
Why does he work with enthusiasm or with a coolness?
Why does a person stay late at work to get certain results,
regardless of whether he gets a salary or not?
And why does a person, who seems to be taking a position of authority,
having a good enough material compensation,
treat work with coolness and work does not arouse in him a rise, does not arouse in him an interest,
he stays late, he spends his time.
How does a person's attitude to work occur? How does this attitude change?
After all, we all know that our motivation does not remain constant.
If we come across some interesting business, some interesting problem,
then we are interested in it, we try to find different ways, approaches,
to get new knowledge in order to solve those tasks that lie ahead of us and achieve results.
As we achieve these results, our interest in the task decreases.
We already know how to solve it.
It turns from new to routine, to usual.
And we already know what and how to do.
We know what difficulties will arise, when problems with reports will arise, and so on.
And from this rise, from the initial one, with which we dealt with this problem,
we move on to a calm, or rather boring, time of work.
The other side of the problem.
We solve some task.
For example, we have a goal to increase sales plans by 10-15% per month.
We actively solve this task, but we are promised bonuses.
We were hinted that if we cope with this task, then we will get a tele-business career,
and we devote all our efforts to solving the problems that lie ahead of us.
We look for opportunities, try to invent new schemes, new models, but it doesn't work.
We don't have a steady growth of sales, and, accordingly, we begin to understand
that in fact, at the end of the month, we will not be able to achieve the result we have set.
And again our motivation decreases.
But in this case, it doesn't decrease because we have solved the problem,
and, accordingly, we already know how and what to do.
It decreases because we have let go.
We realized that we will not be able to solve this problem.
We have convinced ourselves that today is the middle of the month,
and my sales growth is only 3%.
And this means that we have signed our own defeat.
Therefore, we are losing our motivation.
We are losing our reason for behavior.
We have decided for ourselves that we will not be able to cope with the task.
And therefore, we also begin to waste our working time,
having already understood that at the end of the month we will have to report why the task has not been solved.
This is also a problem of motivation.
How to achieve this situation?
So that a person is not afraid to make a mistake.
So that a person understands that if he solves a new task,
it does not mean that he will definitely succeed.
Here the old problem of my responsibility, delegation of responsibility,
the problem of reporting the results,
the problem of finding the balance of freedom and dependence,
the freedom of delegation of certain authorities.
This is a huge and colossal issue that is related to motivation.
And this is the issue that arises every day during our business.
We can motivate ourselves.
We want to go to work. We do not want to.
We want to develop. We do not want to develop.
From the point of view of the development of the company, the development of the business.
We must motivate employees if we are the leaders, the owners of the business.
Because it is the employees who are the tool, the way
thanks to which we get the desired results for us.
But it is very important to understand that it is not right for people,
for employees, for colleagues to look at the means of achieving their goals.
People feel it very well.
This is a colossal demotivating factor.
The problem of managing human resources from the point of view of building a system of motivation
is also a very interesting problem that we will pay a lot of attention to today.
Well, of course, the basic term that interests us is what is labor motivation.
The fact is that motivation is a general concept related to the search for the reasons for human behavior.
But when we talk about commerce, about business, we are not interested in human behavior at all.
This is an interesting academic topic that scientists can deal with.
But we are interested in the specific reasons for human behavior when they carry out their labor activities,
their functional duties, which are related to the work that they do,
the work for which they receive a reward, and the work that interests us, the work that we organize.
Again, we will not argue about the nuances and subtleties of the term labor motivation.
Because if we look at the literature, if we look at the basic, fundamental textbooks,
we will find different reviews and definitions in them.
But since we are interested in the practical definition, the pragmatic definition,
the definition that we can use in practice, let's understand the process of stimulation
of a single employee or the entire labor team, at least during our course,
according to the labor motivation.
Moreover, this process of stimulation is aimed at achieving specific goals that are before the organization.
First, to achieve these goals, and secondly, to make productive decisions and planned plans.
This is a general definition that includes a single employee,
the entire organization with all its characteristics, with all its features,
with its psychological climate, which includes the final result.
When we talk about business, we are primarily interested in the final result.
We invest money and, as a result, we want to get a return.
Therefore, we need the final result in terms of making decisions and achieving them,
and in terms of the goals, missions, tasks of the company we work for.
These are the aspects that are considered, evaluated, and studied in different approaches to motivation.
When we talk about motivation, it is always related to needs.
As for needs, it should be noted that needs in business are understood in a slightly different way
than in psychology or in the academic environment.
In psychology, and in general in life, needs are the need for a person in something.
A person is missing something.
He wants to eat, drink, relax, walk, enjoy.
Accordingly, he makes an effort to satisfy these needs.
As for business, there is also a need for something, but this is a specific need.
A need for achieving and getting a profit.
A need to establish contractual relations with employees,
contractual relations with partners, with those people who are connected with us,
with whom we have a common rule of principle of work.
As for needs, there are usually two types of needs.
Primary needs and secondary needs.
As for primary needs, these are the needs that are necessary for a person to be able to work.
For a person to work, he must be at least full.
Because if you are sitting at work hungry, you will think not about doing your job,
but about just satisfying your hunger.
If you are sitting at work, as it usually happens in summer,
it is very hot outside, and there are no air conditioners in the room,
then, accordingly, you are not thinking about working, but about what to breathe with.
You are thinking about where to drink cold water.
You are thinking about all the windows are open, but it is still impossible to work.
Therefore, the primary needs are, in fact, the creation of conditions necessary for work.
Yes, it is the satisfaction of the same physiological needs.
In order for a person to start solving business tasks,
he must be satisfied with the necessary starting needs.
Only after the satisfaction, the saturation of which, he will be able to start thinking about something else.
This is about secondary needs.
Because secondary needs are produced during life,
during the acquisition of experience, knowledge.
Accordingly, secondary needs are the needs to achieve goals,
to get a certain status, to grow in career, to grow financially,
to promote service, to get into the personnel reserve, and so on.
Only after the primary needs are satisfied, we can talk about secondary needs.
There are no miracles.
If we want to get some result right away,
you must first reach those parameters,
and then we will think about how to satisfy your initial needs.
This is how this situation will not be solved.
A person will never think about business results
before he thinks about satisfying his desires, interests, and tasks.
In principle, when we talk about work motivation,
we can not give up on other terms and concepts.
We will, as necessary, when we will consider different models,
when we will study different ways of material motivation, non-material motivation,
introduce additional, compatible concepts.
But the basic concept is the concept of work motivation, primary and secondary needs.
As for different concepts and theories of motivation,
we will focus on three basic concepts,
because these concepts are really basic.
If we consider a large number of different theories of motivation,
it turns out that all of them can be grouped into three main directions.
Let's be more precise.
The most important of these three directions are the three main directions.
Because, of course, if we consider theories,
there are completely different criteria for their applicability and justification.
The first theory of needs and, accordingly, the construction of motivation
is the hierarchical theory of needs proposed by Abraham Maslow.
The first works appeared somewhere in 1943.
What do I want to draw your attention to?
The concepts we are going to consider are still in the middle of the last century.
But this does not mean that these are good, dusty theories
that should be put into the archives.
The concepts we are going to talk about are really basic theories
based on all modern ideas of self-learning organizations,
ideas of teaching organizations, ideas of system organizations,
ideas of structural organizations, ideas of virtual organizations.
All these new trends that you will get to know during our course
are still based on these three basic concepts.
And, accordingly, we should not consider that since these are concepts of the last century,
and, moreover, of its middle period,
they are nothing more than academic interest.
These are the concepts that really work
and that have proved their pragmatic significance over the past half century.
And we are interested in pragmatics.
We are practitioners, we are not engaged in academic research.
We do not write dissertations.
We are interested in our business, our tasks.
As for the theory of hierarchical needs of oil,
it is a very large, voluminous theory
that has many different nuances.
But we will be interested in the following aspects.
Oil highlights the so-called basic needs and meta-needs.
In fact, we have already talked about this,
the primary and secondary needs.
So this definition, which we have already discussed,
actually refers to oil.
Oil has just said that there are basic or vital needs.
These are the needs for our life,
food, food, reproduction, clothing, housing.
These are the needs that ensure the comfort of our existence.
Until the basic needs are satisfied,
no other needs will be satisfied.
The first thing a person does,
which he does necessarily,
which he does in any conditions,
which he always does,
is to satisfy his basic needs.
This is normal.
This is normal biologically,
because basic needs ensure our physical survival.
If we do not satisfy at least one basic need,
we will have a threat to our life.
And, of course, we will simply be unable to think about anything else.
In addition to the basic needs,
which are the foundation of human existence,
which are the fundamental reason for human behavior,
there are also the needs that are derived from them,
the needs that Maslow calls the metaprocesses.
These are the needs for justice,
for prosperity, for the order of social life,
for respect, for recognition.
In fact, the oil pyramid,
which you are naturally familiar with,
is a structure of needs,
from the basic to the metaprocesses.
The main idea that Maslow laid out
is that this pyramid of needs
is a system.
And no higher need
can be achieved until the lower needs are satisfied.
Human motivation does not allow for leaps.
From this point of view,
you can make a person work for free,
but for this you need a threat,
strength, a camp, a wire, and so on.
This is all that we have seen in the history of the country,
in Gulag, and so on.
Yes, people worked there for free,
but not because they had the appropriate motivation,
they were afraid.
And in fact, this work was related to the fact
that in this way, driven into such conditions,
they satisfied their basic needs.
There was no mention of any metaprocesses,
and since Maslow's concept was related to
a civilized foreign and Western business,
it was applied to people in a situation
where human value existed,
and where the approach of external pressure
that is applied to a person was not allowed.
Maslow considered different types of these needs in his concept.
Deficit needs, motivation needs.
But since the theory itself is not important to us now,
but the ideas that found their expression,
we can focus on the basic and metaprocesses
in terms of understanding the system,
and in terms of understanding that this is a very important principle,
and that is why I am addressing your attention to it again and again,
that each underlying need can be achieved only after the previous one.
And what else is very important that Maslow paid attention to,
and not just paid attention,
but really proved it,
and subsequently it was confirmed by a lot of people,
if you have your own pyramid of needs,
it doesn't mean that it will remain unchanged for the rest of your life.
People are living beings.
Their needs, goals, emotions, motives change.
And a pyramid that was once built can crumble,
because external conditions change in it,
and these conditions change underlying needs, including the basic ones.
Let's say you moved from the middle lane to the Arctic,
and there will be completely different conditions for satisfying your needs in warmth, in food,
and other ways to achieve them.
Therefore, until you learn to systematically satisfy your basic needs,
you will not think about metaprocesses,
about metamotives related to the achievement of certain business results.
And this pyramid of needs changes throughout a person's life.
It's not a static structure,
it's a dynamic formation that is constantly supported,
that is constantly moving,
and that is not set once and for all.
This is also a very important idea,
which gives an answer to the question,
why is the motivation system built in the company once,
which proved its effectiveness in my company,
which facilitated the growth of my company,
its expansion, the provision of new services, the development and expansion of production.
Why, suddenly, after 5, 6, 10, 15 years of the system's application,
it suddenly began to fail?
For 10 years it proved its effectiveness, I don't want to change anything,
but now everything has changed.
What happened?
The circumstances have changed.
People who work in the company have changed.
Their motives, their desires, their needs have changed.
And this whole system has come out of control and requires modification.
You don't have to be afraid to modify the needs that exist.
Let's say, unification of needs is possible only after the end of life.
While we are alive, our needs change.
The next concept of motivation,
which has a significant impact on understanding, vision,
development of tasks that are in front of the business,
is the so-called two-factor motivation theory of Herzberg.
You can meet it in different descriptions.
It's a quote from his English name.
And, as you understand, it's the same person.
The basic ideas of this concept were formed in 1950.
And, again, as for Herzberg,
he was largely inspired by the ideas that were given to Maslow.
Because the concept of Maslow was given almost 10 years earlier.
And we can say that the ideas of Maslow quickly gained popularity,
and, of course, Herzberg was one of them.
But, if the concept of Maslow was a psychological concept,
because Maslow was a psychologist,
and, accordingly, he was interested in the research of a person,
then Herzberg was engaged in the study and analysis of labor motivation,
the analysis of what motives drive a person's work,
what motives help a person achieve results,
and how to strive for motivation to not fall, but to constantly increase.
Herzberg proposes two types of factors.
He doesn't focus so much on human needs as on basic and metaprocesses.
He doesn't start from a person, but from production, business,
from the place where a person works.
Herzberg highlights the internal factors,
which are the content of a person's work.
What does a person do?
Does he produce something?
Does he provide services?
Does he support any other production?
And, from Herzberg's point of view,
the internal factors, i.e., my assessment, my experiences,
my approach, my needs,
are what increase a person's satisfaction with his work.
It is the person, my inner content, my mental characteristics,
my subjective worldview,
that either brings me satisfaction or doesn't,
or the work I do, no matter why,
I like it and I want to go to work with pleasure,
I'm ready to stay at work,
I'm ready to solve the tasks that arise before me,
I'm satisfied with this work.
Or I do the necessary duties in order to live,
I need money, in order to have money,
I need to be at work.
So I came to work and I have to sit off my time from 9 to 6,
with a lunch break and a snack.
I'm not satisfied with my work and I do my duties.
This is the way that is present now in order for me to receive money.
Naturally, I'm not satisfied with the amount of money I receive.
I don't have internal satisfaction with my work.
The internal factors that are present lead to negative motivation.
Moreover, the internal factors, from the point of view of Gelsberg,
are the leading factors in terms of the satisfaction of the work
and in terms of achieving the results I want to achieve.
And besides these internal factors,
what concerns these internal factors,
in fact, is a kind of an analogue of the needs of the masses.
These are the needs of well-being, social order.
What is it for a country with a labor?
I occupy a certain niche on the existing social ladder.
This niche provides me with social well-being
and I am satisfied with what I have achieved in life at the moment.
The second type of factors that Gelsberg offers
are external or hygienic factors.
These are the conditions of work, salary,
relationships between people in the group,
relationships between people in the labor collective where I work.
Conflicts, support,
do people stick sticks into each other's wheels or not?
What is the policy of the company?
Is the employee considered as a means, as a screw for achieving the goal?
Either the company pays great attention to the development of the growth of the staff,
gives the opportunity to learn, opens the prospects of career growth.
The management style of the company is acceptable and pleasant to me.
The company gives me an opportunity to develop,
to realize.
These hygienic factors are those factors
that can reduce my dissatisfaction with the work.
But this is a very important aspect
that was discovered by Gelsberg, formulated.
Today it has become the backbone of working with the staff.
Hygienic factors, salary increase,
can reduce my dissatisfaction with the work.
I understand that I have to spend 5 days a week,
from 9 to 6, sitting at work,
but I understand that I sit to get a certain material reward.
But even by reducing this dissatisfaction with the work,
hygienic factors cannot have a significant impact
on the increase in the productivity of the work.
You can increase a person's salary,
but if a person is dissatisfied,
then the work he does,
the team he works in,
the management he has,
will not put his soul into the work,
and the increase in the productivity will be perceived as due.
I do not be late for work, I hand in reports on time,
and I am paid for doing this better than others.
But I am still dissatisfied.
Gelsberg, in his two-factor theory of motivation,
formulated the task of dissatisfaction with the work.
Gelsberg formulated the situation
that the satisfaction with the work I do
is a function of the work content,
what I do.
And dissatisfaction with the work is a function of the work conditions.
If I do not like the work conditions,
I am not satisfied with my work obligations,
with what I do.
Moreover, the content of the work itself
can be satisfactory for me.
And here you need to find a balance.
A balance between the internal factors of my satisfaction
and the external factors, hygienic factors,
which have an impact on my dissatisfaction with the work.
In the end, I need two hours to get to work,
and even through traffic jams.
This means that I have to get up early.
After work, I have to get home for a long time.
This is all that is naturally unsatisfactory.
No wonder, very often,
one of the points related to the reception of employees
and candidates to work is how much time is required
to get to work.
If it is a very long time,
then we can immediately say
that the candidate will have a dissatisfaction.
Not immediately, but later.
If it takes more than 45 minutes to get to work,
this is the statistical data that was received by foreign researchers.
They love statistics and everything is measured.
This means that a person will not work effectively.
Half a day he will come to himself,
and half a day he will think that he will have to come back for a long time.
Therefore, as the research shows,
the time spent to get to work
should be up to 45 minutes.
Again, these are ideal conditions
that one would like to have,
but it is not always possible.
So, the concept of Gersberg laid the foundations
for the analysis of business processes.
In fact, it helped to translate the theory of oil
from a psychological point of view
to the application of labor motivation
to engineering or industrial organization psychology.
The third concept that we will need for the future
is also a basic concept.
This is the theory of motivation developed by McClelland.
As for McClelland,
it is the middle of the last century,
even if it is the 1960s, it is still the middle.
McClelland tried to solve the same question.
What are the motivational needs
that influence a person's work?
McClelland, having conducted a lot of experiments,
a lot of observations,
and, of course, he did not work alone,
he worked with a team of authors.
In addition to the team of authors,
he analyzed a lot of literature
and the experience of different successful companies,
different business representatives,
American, European, Eastern.
McClelland came to the conclusion
that of all the abundance of needs,
primary, secondary, from the oil pyramid,
Gersberg's needs,
from all other theories,
which are, I remind you,
thousand-page books describing the theory of motivation,
if we really want to get a working pragmatic tool,
then from all this abundance
we can highlight three basic needs,
which have a fundamental influence,
a fundamental influence on the work motivation,
by influencing it,
by systematizing it,
by intersecting with it,
we can achieve a significant change
in a person's motivational behavior.
As for McClelland,
he solved the practical problem.
There are a lot of motives, a lot of needs.
Where are the buttons that can be pressed
to get the desired work results?
From McClelland's point of view,
and, accordingly, this point of view
has been repeatedly confirmed,
at least the fact that his concept
remains the basic one for a long time,
we can highlight three key needs.
The first need is the need for achievement.
Achievement of results.
In fact, this is an answer to the question
of how well I work,
how well, quickly, efficiently
I achieve the results I should achieve.
Every person has a need for achievement.
And as for a person,
every person sets a certain level,
a certain level of demands,
what I want to achieve,
what I want to achieve.
And, accordingly, this is a certain ideal.
A young specialist, after the university,
came to work and he sets a task for himself.
In three, five, six years,
he will become a department head,
an authority specialist,
a consultant, an assistant to the head.
Depending on the structure that exists in his organization,
he sets a certain level
that he clings to,
that he wants to achieve.
This is natural.
Any person is so arranged that
before he starts doing something,
he sets a goal.
The goal is to satisfy
a particular need
to act within a particular motive.
So, the employee has set a certain goal.
These are the demands he clings to.
And then the feedback is turned on.
A person starts assessing
the achievements that he has.
In fact, he assesses this delta
between the level of his demands
and the level of his achievements.
Three years have passed,
and I still remain a sales manager.
I have not become a senior manager,
a leading manager.
Yes, I do well in the planned tasks
that I am given.
But those employees who came with me
have already received a certain level of
personnel growth,
have been included in the personnel reserve,
are directed to certain training systems.
And, of course, being in any organization,
in any team,
you feel your value
and the value of the people around you.
So, I compare the achievements
that I have with those of others
and, in fact, I give myself an assessment.
Am I successful or not?
Can I really claim
the level I have set for myself?
Or will all this remain an overstatement?
The need for achievements
is a very significant need.
In fact, it is a need that forms
my satisfaction with work.
If I achieve results,
then my satisfaction with work grows.
I managed to find myself.
And the fact that I spend most of my time
on work finds the results that I have.
Accordingly, every person evaluates
the ratio of what I achieve,
what I get,
since I spend time on work.
The need for achievements
is really a very important need.
It is important for all of us to know
what we are worth.
And this is what Leiland describes.
The second need,
which is a key button for work motivation,
is the need for power.
The need for power does not mean
that the power is political,
although it can be.
The need for power means
the ability to keep under control
the circumstances that I have to influence
and influence other people.
People who work directly with me,
people who are under my command,
people who guide me
so that they give me a high rating
and understand that if I give
certain suggestions,
they are justified and therefore
these suggestions can be fulfilled.
Power is like control.
I don't think that this need
will cause any disputes or questions.
A person is simply arranged in such a way
that he wants to be the master of his behavior,
the master of his position.
And, of course, if we are talking about work,
about business, about work motivation,
then in this case I want to keep
under control the conditions of my work,
the conditions of my career growth,
the conditions of my material stimulation,
the conditions of my social package.
I want to keep them under control
and change the side that suits me,
the side of increasing,
the side of getting all the new benefits, etc.
Power is like control.
Control in any broad sense.
In principle, power is the translation
of the English word power,
which is not familiar to our Russian mentality.
Power is like a leadership of someone.
Power is like control and influence on other people.
Influence from the point of view of manipulation.
Influence from the point of view of authority.
But if I said something,
I must know that it will be done.
I must be sure that I was able to organize something
and this organization is based on control.
Control of those or other labor processes.
And the third key need for a person
is the need for acceptance.
This is the gift of nature to a person,
first and foremost,
and secondly, this is the gift of the concept of oil.
A person lives among other people
and among other people he is a social being.
And in any case, my behavior, my actions,
my success, my failures, my achievements
are what I compare to what another person has.
We do not work alone.
We work in contact with different people.
And any person needs to feel respect
from other people.
I must be accepted by others.
I must be authoritative to others.
And others will turn to me for advice,
for consultation, for help.
Accordingly, other people evaluate me as a professional,
evaluate me as a specialist.
And this, again, gives me a certain satisfaction.
This is the realization of my metapotrebnosti,
the realization of my social value,
the realization of my place on the ladder of social hierarchy,
and the realization of my authority.
So, these are the three basic, key, button needs
that Mclellan sets out.
Achievements, authority, acceptance.
And then, depending on the connection between these needs,
how these needs are realized,
Mclellan solves the problem of efficiency of the manager,
the efficiency of the labor motivation
that should be there to achieve business results.
Perhaps, the basic position,
which is supported, developed,
and based on Mclellan and his supporters' concepts,
is that if I consider managers,
then for efficient managers,
those who achieve results,
those who know how to organize their work,
who know how to organize the execution of certain actions,
the first place is for the need for achievement and authority,
and only then the need for acceptance arises.
Again, we can recall from our own experience
many successful managers, many successful business owners,
who first think about the need to keep everything under control,
this is the first thing,
and secondly, to take their business niche,
to take a certain segment of the market,
and only after the satisfaction of these needs
another question arises.
Well, how do they evaluate me now?
What kind of PR should I do
so that the attitude towards me from the employees,
from my colleagues, from the society
is more or less acceptable
so that it is socially significant in one way or another?
This is the theory of motivation of MacLeland.
Its beauty, its advantages,
is that it gives three characteristics
that can be controlled,
that can be influenced,
that can be compared with each other
to get a certain direction
in the labor motivation that I want to realize.
We are, as I said, based on these three basic concepts.
All other concepts,
which are based in a large number in one way or another
on the concepts of Maslow, MacLeland, and Gersberg.
And then, when we will look at specific examples,
we will see it.
The next question that we will consider today
will be related to the question
of how to improve the motivation of the labor.
We have considered the basic concepts,
talked about the approaches
that are being tried to direct to the right direction,
to the right direction of motivation of the employees.
We will be interested in a specific question.
How can we improve the motivation of the labor?
This problem has as many solutions
as the authors tried to deal with it.
Each manager, each manager,
each manager has his own vision,
his own understanding.
And this understanding depends on what he does,
on his experience.
It depends on the market sphere in which the company functions.
And it is quite difficult to give some general recommendations.
However, you can try, based on the analysis of the literature,
based on the analysis of the effectiveness of the labor,
based on the effectiveness of the motivation system in different companies,
to highlight those points that have a significant impact
on improving motivation.
In fact, in this case, we have the same task
as we had before McClelland.
To highlight from the abundance of factors of need
those key buttons that can be pressed
in order to get the motivation we want.
As for the methods of motivation of the labor,
we can highlight five basic methods.
I want to draw your attention to them again.
In the literature, you can find 2, 3, 5, 105, 215, 315 methods.
But since our goal is to structure these methods,
let's consider these approaches
so that they can be applied in other conditions of work.
The first method, which, I think, comes to everyone's mind,
is the most common, especially in the domestic environment,
and I would recommend it.
It is a very powerful motive,
especially for those employees who do not have enough experience for work,
who are looking for themselves.
This is, of course, material stimulation of labor.
What does any employee who comes to work want?
He wants, let's recall Herzberg,
he wants his work to be interesting and satisfying.
But the original motivator, which arises when I get a job,
is the question of what the material stimulation will be like,
what my salary will be like,
how it will grow, what the salary for the probation period will be like,
whether the annual system of reviews will be implemented,
and whether the increase in salary will be increased according to the results of the work.
In the end, we work to earn money,
because this way we can ensure the satisfaction of all our basic and meta-needs.
Our economy, our economic relations, our society, our politics
are organized in such a way that everything revolves around the material means
that are necessary for obtaining material benefits.
I invest my time and effort into work,
I produce something, but I need something else.
I get money for my work and I get everything I want,
or as much as I can get according to the results.
The next way to get motivation for work
is to increase the quality and level of labor.
This is a method that is very important for business.
Indeed, people work in companies,
people are loyal to companies,
people have experience of being in a company,
they know the underwater stones that exist there,
they know the location of the company on the market,
in the end, they are the owners and carriers of corporate information, confidential information,
and, accordingly, the business owner is interested
so that this information does not go beyond the company.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide people, the staff,
with the opportunity to get their development within this company.
That is, to organize a system of training and development of the staff.
These are very important qualities that will be associated with motivation for work.
If an employee sees that the company invests money in his training,
therefore, the employee feels that the company is interested in him working in it.
And, again, in return, he will, based on the company's gratitude,
based on the fact that he sees his further place, his further work in this company,
strive to work better, strive to work better,
and the funds that were invested in the construction of his training will be accumulated many times.
In addition to training, the improvement of the quality of the workforce,
the improvement of the quality of the staff,
various programs for the development of the staff are facilitated.
Indeed, the development of the staff involves the presence of a staff reserve,
the construction of a career path.
That is, a person should know what positions he can take in the company,
what requirements arise for each position.
The company can have a grading system, a system of key efficiency indicators.
In the end, the employee should see the prospects that arise before him.
Again, let's remember that all motivation is the cause of behavior,
and the cause of behavior requires goals.
Today I work for a private position, today I get, let's say,
not as much money as I want to get.
I have two options.
Either I can look for another job where I will be paid more,
or I can strive to grow, develop inside the company,
where I will get more, where my weight, my authority, my knowledge will gradually grow,
and, accordingly, where my social status will increase.
In addition, if we talk about the quality of the workforce,
then from the point of view of human resources management,
the task of assessing the staff arises.
How effectively does a person cope with the responsibilities imposed on him?
What competencies does he already have?
What competencies does he lack, and it is desirable for him to add them
so that he becomes even more successful in the implementation of the functionality that he has.
Accordingly, the assessment of the staff is the procedure that will allow the company,
on the one hand, to understand whether it has enough human resources to solve its tasks,
or whether it is necessary to go to the labor market and look for third-party specialists
and lure them into the company to change the functioning of the staff and improve their work,
or I will not turn to the foreign market, but will grow specialists with my own efforts.
As for domestic specifics,
it is often said that companies are trying to buy over, lure the best specialists from the outside.
However, this is a stick at two ends.
Today you have lured, tomorrow you have this specialist, another company has lured.
And, accordingly, these relations of buying and selling do not always give the desired result.
Naturally, if we are talking about improving the quality of the workforce,
then again there is a problem of motivation.
What motivation systems, what motivation schemes can be proposed
so that a person A. is interested in working in this company,
B. is interested in the development within this company,
C. so that a person B. is loyal to the company,
is a bearer of corporate ideas, values, culture, stereotypes,
and, accordingly, feels like a part of this company.
The problem of improving the quality of the workforce is a very costly procedure,
because both training, development, assessment, and introduction of new motivation schemes,
motivation schemes related to payments, material motivation, non-material motivation,
all these require additional efforts, all these require calculation, analysis,
and, again, in this situation, it is not worth expecting a return right away.
This is a very important point.
Often, managers, having good intentions related to increasing their business performance,
and ready to invest in the development of the staff,
see that they do not receive the return they want in the period they want.
In this regard, they stop throwing money away from their point of view
and move on to the good old traditional authoritarian methods of management.
If you do not want to work, leave.
We will find a person who will do the job for the same money, in the same place,
as we need.
This is, by the way, a clear specific, which, unfortunately, is very common.
We will talk about this a little later today,
when we will talk about the construction of different motivation systems in Russia.
The next way to improve the motivation of the labor is to improve the organization of labor.
This is directly related to the concepts of Herzberg, which we talked about.
How to disperse the employees, how to organize the workplace,
where to place the equipment, how to provide ventilation,
how to arrange a workplace, how to open a relaxation room,
so that the employee, upon coming to work,
has an opportunity to recover his strength,
relieve fatigue, and relieve stress.
Because we all understand that working in business is a constant stress,
it is a constant functioning in conditions of lack of time,
in conditions of lack of time.
It is a constant performance of different functions,
when the same employee must prepare a different report to different departments,
from different managers, but at the same time.
Accordingly, the time management problem is necessary,
the organization of working time,
the implementation of time management from the point of view of time management of the employee himself,
the system of setting goals must be implemented in the right way.
It is not easy to say that at the end of the month you should increase the sales plan.
This is an uncertain task.
How much to increase? How to increase?
I increased the sales plan by 2%, and the manager meant 10%.
And, accordingly, there is a misunderstanding.
And here is not so much the fault of the manager,
but the goals set inadequately.
Accordingly, when we talk about the improvement of the organization of work,
it is a problem of building a management vertical,
it is a problem of building a relationship at the horizontal level,
it is a problem of assessing the success of the functioning of one or another employee,
the success of the process of communication of this employee with other employees,
and, again, from the point of view of the compliance of the employee with the position.
The next way to improve motivation is to involve the staff in the management process.
For the Russian tradition, this is a relatively new approach,
which has not yet found a fairly wide spread.
But for the Western business, this process has been implemented for a long time.
Because if a person is involved in the management process of a business,
it does not matter what level it is.
Is it the level of the organization of the department's work?
Is it the level of the organization of the work of two managers nearby?
Is it the level of the organization of the company's management in general?
The construction of a system of relations and crossings within different departments?
The main thing is that a person begins to feel the need of the company,
and a person begins to believe that he is not a common pawn in this company,
that he is considered to be one, his opinion is asked, he is respected.
As they say, let a person have faith in his needs.
Remember, we talked about the need for recognition of MacLeland.
And this faith in needs is a very strong guiding motive
for which a person will invest, for which a person will strive to make
certain achievements that he would not have done in ordinary conditions,
no matter how much you raise his salary,
no matter what more profitable offers you offer him.
People are so arranged that they need not only to feel their importance,
but also to see that they are valued,
that they should consider that they are in their place,
and only then will they hold on to this place.
The next point, which is related to the improvement of the motivation of labor,
is non-money stimulation.
Or what is called non-material stimulation of labor.
This type of stimulation begins to get its spread and development
in those conditions, in those cases when the business is already sufficiently developed,
when the business is already sufficiently stable,
when the company has a certain place in the market,
when the company has a certain prehistory, certain traditions,
when the company has a certain brand.
The brand itself is already a very interesting non-material way of stimulation.
When the staff is ready to come to the company for a lower salary,
for more work than in another, but this is a brand company,
and the neighboring companies are just beginning to develop,
and, accordingly, have not yet managed to gain authority.
The system of non-material stimulation has not yet received widespread spread in Russia,
although large companies that exist in Russia,
mostly foreign capital companies,
provide a large block of non-material stimulation in the compensation package,
which is very attractive and interesting for the staff,
which we will talk about a little later.
So, look, here are the main five directions
that are currently being used to improve the motivation of the labor.
Again, I want to say, you can argue with some of them,
that this direction will not work, this direction is not so important.
These directions do not mean that each of them should be applied to your company,
and that each of them will earn in your company.
Again, it is necessary to remember.
This is what is the accumulation of world business experience.
But, any company has its own specifics,
and, accordingly, you can take what is more accessible in your company,
corresponds to its position on the market,
corresponds to its rating, corresponds to its quotations,
corresponds, in the end, to the financial and economic indicators that the company has.
Again, you can ask, why there are no other ways of motivation of the labor,
for example, related to foreign business trips,
with the provision of loans for apartments, and so on.
These are the details that we will talk about.
I would just like to outline the main paths and goals.
And the specific content will depend on the functions and tasks
that arise in your activities.
So, perhaps now let's turn to such a problem as material and non-material stimulation.
As for these two approaches, on the one hand,
the most obvious, the most understandable, the easiest to perceive ways of stimulating labor,
which either help motivate employees and staff,
or, on the contrary, build a line of demotivation
and, accordingly, prevent the implementation of the economic indicators that the company has.
What methods of material stimulation are usually used?
The simplest is, of course, the method of material stimulation based on the results of the work.
The worker performs a plan, and, accordingly,
he receives a certain amount of material reward for the execution of this plan.
This reward is usually divided into two parts.
There is a certain fixed part that the employee will receive in any case.
Let's say, this is the part that pays for the hospital,
this is the part that pays for the period of absence of the employee at work,
and this is the part that is paid to the employee only for sitting down his working time
from 9 to 6, from 10 to 7, depending on the internal work order.
At the same time, there is a bonus or variable part of the payment,
which is paid to the employee based on the results of his personal direct work during the month,
on the increase in the volume of sales, on the expansion of the market of services that he offers,
on the increase in the number of clients that he brings to the company.
That is, if the fixed part is what you are paid for the fact of your presence at work,
then the variable part is what is reflected in your contribution, in your labor motivation.
If you want to earn more, show more activity, spend more time promoting services,
signing contracts, looking for clients, you will receive more.
This is a very good, moving motive that is effective from the beginning of the employee's work.
While I am in business, while I am gaining experience,
and again, it should be said that the systems of this material variable part are different.
There are progressive systems, depending on the fact that the more results you achieve,
the more variable part you get.
There are regressive systems.
The fact is that, in the end, any company is interested in making a profit
and letting it not only for the salary, but for the expansion of production,
for the change of equipment, for the inclusion of different telecommunication systems, and so on.
And, accordingly, you need to find a balance,
to stimulate the employee on the one hand,
but on the other hand, to keep the funds for the direct development of the business.
There are many different systems of variable motivation,
and we will talk about it a little later, when we will touch on the motivation system in Russian terms.
And again, in the literature that I have suggested to you,
there are many different schemes of building material,
precisely material stimulation, which we are talking about.
In addition to this material stimulation, there is a system of bonuses.
These bonuses can be one-time, really, for some outstanding results,
for solving any problems.
Or periodically, when an employee, while fulfilling his functions,
successfully performing them, receives an additional payment for his work,
on the condition of the implementation of the plan.
Different tasks can be solved by this scheme of bonuses.
In fact, it is necessary to keep the employee in tune,
because you will always get the fixed part, and this is the additional part.
If you work successfully, you will receive these bonuses.
But there are different circumstances.
And if suddenly the efficiency of your work began to fall systematically,
then the question arises about the expediency of paying you this constant bonus.
And as for the bonus system of labor,
it is often prescribed in the labor contract, which is signed by the employee.
And this is what the employee can claim,
because these are the expectations he receives from the work,
which is signed in his labor contract.
But in addition to this, there are also so-called stimulating payments,
which are implemented by the management at their discretion.
The management can encourage the employee for the result.
The management can encourage the employee for the future,
so that he feels that he is not some part of the gray mass,
but that the manager is watching his success, his achievements,
that he can get assistance from his more successful, more experienced colleagues,
and, accordingly, so that he is not afraid to experiment.
We all understand that while we are gaining experience, we can make mistakes,
we can get certain results.
And in order to support the positive aspects of the employee's work,
his functioning, his initiative, his desire to take on additional responsibility,
all this can be stimulated at once, at the discretion of the management.
Someone can get it, someone may not.
Again, the way of building this free stimulation depends on the policy
in the management of human resources, which is implemented in the company,
which exists in a company.
And this system of stimulation significantly forms a favorable psychological climate
for the work in the team, it forms the desire of the staff to stay in this company,
and not to look for another company.
Still, as for material stimulation, this is a relatively well-developed topic.
There are different schemes for building a material stimulus system,
bonuses and compensations.
I would like to focus on non-material stimulation or on the formation of a compensation package.
Its other name, which may be more familiar and common,
is a social package provided by the company to its employees.
When we come to work, to get a job,
a person understands that in addition to material stimulation,
he can get something else at this job.
Some additional social package, additional services,
additional opportunities that the company provides to its employees
depending on the results of their work, their time, their contribution to the company's achievements.
The social package in different companies is different.
Again, the problem is that the social package is still a certain part of the company's profit,
which is used for development.
Accordingly, these are some additional services,
some additional opportunities that the company provides to its employees.
Not in the current natural equivalent,
but from the point of view of additional services and opportunities
that you can use until you become an employee of this particular company.
What elements are usually included in the social package?
Very often medical insurance is used for employees and members of their families.
Again, the scheme can be different.
It can be full medical insurance payment.
It can be discounts on medical insurance payment.
The employee has the opportunity to choose different medical service schemes.
Depending on the term of your work in the company,
depending on your status in the company,
depending on the bets that the management makes on you,
you can get different schemes for increasing or decreasing direction.
Moreover, these schemes can be provided not only to you,
but also to members of your family.
This is a very important motivating factor.
You may be dissatisfied with the amount of salary that you get.
But on the other hand, you understand that by working in this company,
you have the opportunity to be served in good medical centers,
with significant discounts.
In fact, this non-material stimulation is an addition to the material package.
If you pay less, you get more from the salary that you get.
A very important component of the social and compensation package
is the opportunity to train professional development.
I think you all agree that good education,
good educational service providers,
where you can get the required skills,
the developed skills, are expensive.
The company is naturally interested in the fact that
its employees are professional and competent.
And, of course, these employees are the ones that the recruitment company is looking for.
But on the other hand, we have already talked about this,
business is constantly changing,
new circumstances and conditions are constantly emerging,
legislative documents are changing,
and all these changes need to be monitored.
Therefore, the company can pay its employees both individual training
and organizational training for the whole organization.
This is called organizational training,
which is getting more and more widespread today.
As for training, it is a rather expensive item in the budget of the organization.
And this expensive item can often not lead to the desired result,
and, accordingly, the money spent will not always pay off as quickly as the management wants.
On the other hand, this expense item can lead to a rather serious and significant growth of business results
that the company has, significantly improve its competitive ability,
significantly stabilize its position in the market,
correspond to the expansion and greater coverage of market segments.
As for training and development, we have already talked about this today.
And again, the main thing here is that the employee understands
that if the company invests money in its training,
then the company is interested in it staying.
Naturally, it makes no sense to train an employee so that he goes to competitors after that
and uses professional skills.
The management system of human resources is aimed at
creating a loyalty of the staff to many non-material, but social components that we are talking about now.
Many companies, again, practice a variety of compensations.
For example, for lunch.
As for work, we spend 9-10 hours at work,
and, again, we must meet our basic needs.
The basic needs in food.
Very often it turns out that lunch time is provided,
and what will you do at this time?
Will you work? Will you smoke? Will you go out to eat?
This is already given to the staff.
And very often it turns out that people use this time not for food,
but for rest, to solve their own problems,
to go somewhere, to do some other things.
If the company is interested in having staff who can really work,
it can organize lunches, both for the company and for the employees,
and compensate the cost of these lunches completely or partially.
In addition to lunches, we can talk about the provision of a service car.
Again, we understand that we are talking about those managers or employees of the level
to which the car is really a necessary element
in terms of performing their service duties.
In order to be able to go to the appropriate organization, tax inspection,
and quickly or on time solve certain problems.
In order to have the opportunity to get to the partners with whom we work,
to quickly transfer the necessary documents.
Another element can be the provision of payment for mobile communication,
because mobile phones are not a luxury anymore,
but a necessary element of our everyday activities,
a necessary element of effective functioning.
And, of course, since it is a tool for work,
which the employee uses to solve the functional tasks in front of him,
then, again, you can compensate for the payment of mobile communication.
So, as for a variety of compensations for lunches,
for mobile communication, for payment of a phone, and so on,
this is another element of non-material stimulation,
because it indicates that the company is interested in the employee.
And, of course, there is nothing surprising or bad about it.
These are the additional opportunities that the employee can use in his interests.
We are all living people, and we should not dream of perfect employees
who will talk exclusively about work on a mobile phone.
If this happens, then it can cause some surprise
whether there are any other problems hidden here.
A very important aspect in terms of non-material stimulation
is the construction of a system of non-state pension.
We all know that the pension system of state pension funds,
the pension that is provided after retirement,
is so insignificant, 3-5 thousand rubles, that you cannot live on it.
Especially if you are used to living on completely expensive amounts.
That is why, in Russia, in the West, of course,
it has a long history, non-state pension funds are being formed,
where the company additionally invests the material resources,
which will later be used to compensate the person
for the termination of his work.
And this is a very important aspect.
Because the company binds the employee to itself for a long time.
In order to get a pension, you need to work in the company for 5-10-15 years.
Depending on how long you worked, you will get the corresponding pension.
Therefore, there is a very important motivating factor
that binds a person to the company he works in.
And then, while working in this company,
there may be various discontent, various displeasures.
But the fact that you have 2-3-4-5 years left to work to get a non-state pension
can be a very strong, very powerful, very powerful motivating factor
that will ensure the functioning of a person,
and the functioning of a person should be professional, adequate,
responsible at his workplace.
Because you know, depending on how successful you are in solving any problem,
it will determine the dividends that you will get in the end,
or what you will lose.
These are not material factors.
This is not what you get now in the amount of your salary.
This is what you can get later.
But people are so organized that they don't live in the present day.
Whatever we say, we think about the future.
We think about what will happen tomorrow,
what will happen if we suddenly get sick,
if we suddenly can't run and spin like a squirrel in a wheel,
as we do now,
if our loved ones suddenly get sick.
We live in the world, we are living people,
and there is nothing to be afraid of.
And in this regard, the fact of getting a decent enough compensation
can be a motivating factor
that can even compensate for the dissatisfaction in the salary you get now.
This system of non-state pension insurance
can be implemented in stable economic conditions,
and it can be implemented in large companies.
Because the deductions in the pension fund,
which we are talking about now,
are quite substantial additional deductions
that a company can take from its profits
and take from the prospects of its further development.
At the same time, a social package can be included
in the partial payment of the trips to the resort,
both for employees and for members of their families.
A good vacation is not cheap,
and in this regard, if a company pays or compensates
a part of the amount for a trip,
it is a very important motivating factor.
Let it be 20%, let it be 10%.
But this is the situation when the fact is important,
not the amount.
Because the employee will remember
that the company invested in my vacation,
in addition to the vacation I got on hand.
And, therefore, I am interested in working in this company,
because it is not a fact that the company
that promises me more money,
where they promise me less employment,
will be able to provide me with the social package
that they provide me with as carefully as possible.
There are many other pleasant details
that companies can include in the social package.
Payment of fitness clubs, pools, gyms,
various corporate events,
which for the company are a large amount,
but on the other hand, they contribute to the development
of this single corporate spirit,
contribute to the unity of the team,
contribute to the formation of loyalty in the team
and contribute to the formation of a sense of community.
This is my company.
These are the conditions that my company provides me with.
This is the care that my company provides me with,
not only for me, but also for my family.
And, accordingly, there is an inclusion
of both professional activity and personal life.
And, accordingly, this is the care that is shown in me.
A person usually never forgets
and does not exchange these pleasant little things,
and these can really be little things,
which he will not receive in another company.
Yes, he can get a higher salary there,
but, among other things, he can lose a lot
in terms of this social package,
which is a very powerful stimulating non-material factor.
As for the Russian specifics,
we will talk about this a little later,
the social package is still an element
that is gradually being introduced,
but has not yet been widely spread.
However, more and more companies
are beginning to understand its need.
Unfortunately, not all companies are able
to invest sufficient funds
in the development of this social package.
This is another problem
related to the national business specifics,
which we will talk about a little later.